There are a lot of very important systems
in the world today that with even a little
bit of critical analysis don't really make
that much sense. Private equity has become
a multi-trillion dollar staple of the investing
industry, but it seems to make more money from
financial shell games than it does from
actually running businesses. And yet,
people are still giving these firms trillions
of dollars. The rest of the market is being kept
afloat by a technology almost everybody admits is
some kind of bubble. New creative flavors of debt
are being sold off as revolutionary new ways
of empowering spending. But at the same time,
the consumers that all of this relies on are more
broke than ever before. It seems like across the
entire economy, nobody is actually making any
money. But everybody is getting paid as long
as they go along with it. The one thing that ties
all this together is the unshakable belief that by
the time this delicate system unravels, it will be
someone else's problem. I'm back. I want to shift
to the debt conversation. Florida's buy now pay
later interestf free loan model may be backfiring.
The financial services company net loss more than
doubled in the first quarter. Valuation stands at
19.65 billion. The Swedish fintech upsized its IPO
indicating very strong demand for the 20year-old
company. There are a lot of homeowners right now
who can't afford to move even if they wanted to.
Trillion dollars this year partly due to high
prices. But let's start with these markets. As
we just heard Brian mentioned, the S&P and NASDAQ
record highs again. Okay, so back in the 1970s,
companies had a problem. Their executives were
just regular employees that were collecting a
paycheck like everybody else. Their paycheck
was larger, but actually not that much larger
than a regular employee. According to data from
the Economic Policy Institute, the average CEO
of one of the largest 350 companies in 1965 earned
just over 20 times more than the average employee.
This was partially because average workers earn
more and because executives earned significantly
less year-toear. This was obviously a big problem
because it encouraged executives to hold on to
their jobs long-term and not take too many risks
so they could keep on earning this comfortable
salary. Back then, the average tenure of a top
executive was roughly double what it is today.
And the average company spent roughly twice
as much time in the S&P 500. At this time,
most of the profits these companies made were
reinvested back into the company itself to acquire
new business, research and develop new products,
and pay their staff. Eventually, shareholders
figured out that it was better to pay these
executives larger bonuses based on performance,
especially performance that returned more money
to them. Now, hot take alert, but this by itself
is completely reasonable. Shareholders own the
company, and they should make sure that there
are systems in place to align employee incentives
with their own objectives. And of course, their
number one objective is getting a return on their
investment. Where things did start to go a little
bit off the rails, though, was when a law that
significantly limited stock buybacks was repealed
in 1982. This let executives use company money to
buy back their own shares on the public market,
which did a few things. The first thing was that
it increased the share price even if the company
wasn't actually doing any better. When this law
was repealed, the average company in the S&P 500
had a price to earnings ratio of about 6.2, 2,
which meant 6.2 years of company profits would
cover the price of the company's shares. Today,
that PE ratio is over 36, which really just means
that shares are roughly six times more expensive
than they were in 1982 for the same amount of
profit. This is great for existing shareholders,
but makes the whole market a lot more questionable
in terms of true value. Buybacks also make
financial metrics like earnings per share
look better, but not because the company makes
more money, but rather because there are just
fewer shares. Now, another hot take alert, but
even this was arguably good for shareholders who
enjoyed capital appreciation in taxefficient stock
returns. But as the late Charlie Mer once said,
"Show me the incentive and I will show you
the outcome." Stock buybacks are kind of like
crack for corporate finance. they will get that
stock price high even if the rest of the business
is falling apart or even if they are causing the
rest of the business to fall apart. Stock buybacks
started as an alternative to dividends that could
be used when the executive team believed that the
company stock was undervalued. That eventually
gave way as more money started to be spent on
buybacks than dividends and then more money
was spent on buybacks than reinvestment into
the business itself to fund R&D or workforce
development. A lot of companies took it even
further than this and spent more on stock
buybacks than the company was making a
profit. They did this by borrowing money to buy
their own shares back from their own investors,
which is why corporate debt is at all-time highs.
Now, for most businesses, this was clearly very
dumb. But it pumps stock prices enough for CEOs
to make absolutely enormous bonuses. The average
CEO now earns more than 340 times more than their
average employee. And with such enormous fortunes
that can be made in such little time, it's very
hard for anybody to not play the game. Of course,
it's not sustainable. But that's next quarter's
problem. So, it's time to learn how money works
to find out what happens when the next quarter
finally arrives. This week's video is sponsored
by NordVPN, who partnered with me to help keep you
safer online because the internet can still feel
like the digital wild west. NordVPN's mission
is to make the internet safer, more private,
and free from tracking, censorship, and those
sketchy moments when a website just does not feel
right. With one click, you get a fast, secure
VPN that protects your connection anywhere in
the world. And with Threat Protection Pro, Nord
goes beyond a normal VPN by blocking malware,
stopping fishing attempts, and warning you if you
are about to land on a fake online shop. It has
already helped me once when I almost bought from
a site that looked a little too generous. Threat
protection pro flagged it immediately and I backed
away before giving a scammer my card details. You
can also turn on dark web monitor which keeps an
eye on leaked credentials and alerts you if any of
your information shows up anywhere it should not.
To try it yourself, go to www.nordvpn.com/moneyut
or hit the link in the description for the
exclusive NordVPN deal plus four extra months
free. It is completely risk-free with Nord's
30-day money back. So, corporate buybacks have
been bad for workers, bad for the economy, and
worst of all, it's been bad for the investors,
but people already knew this, and there is
a reason that they simply don't care. Over a
decade ago, one of the CEOs broke rank and wrote
in an open letter that too many companies have
cut capital expenditures and even increased debt
to boost dividends and increase share buybacks.
That was back in 2014. in what people thought
was the peak of the buyback mania. Since then,
quarterly buybacks have roughly doubled
despite interest rates being much higher,
which would theoretically make businesses want
to hold on to cash rather than borrowing it. But
that's a problem for next quarter. By the way, the
CEO that betrayed his executive comrades to raise
the alarm about how share buybacks had undermined
the market was none other than Larry Frink,
the head of BlackRock, the largest asset manager
in the world. So, yeah, it's pretty easy to
blame the rise in short-term thinking on corporate
executives using questionable financial strategies
to make themselves incredibly wealthy, but they
are really just a symptom of a much bigger problem
that goes well beyond corporate America. And
there are a few reasons why this is happening.
The first reason is that there is now a lot more
money to be made in value extraction rather than
value creation. William Lauszanic, a professor
of economics at the University of Massachusetts,
wrote about this in a now infamous paper
titled Profits Without Prosperity. He noted
that between the end of the Second World War
and the early 1970s, most businesses became
successful by creating value for consumers or
other businesses. Today, that's much harder
as companies are trying to keep up with their
financial commitments to shareholders. Over time,
more money for research and development has come
from the government instead as companies have
spent what they used to spend on R&D on pumping up
their own stocks. Today, corporate profits are at
all-time highs while a record number of companies
are actually losing money. This again is largely
the result of short-term business planning. As
companies price to earnings ratios have expanded,
the best way for innovators to get money out of
their ideas is not actually to run a business.
It's to scale a business and then sell it. When
average company PE ratios were 5 to six, that
means it would take 5 to 6 years for the business
to cover its purchase price. Good founders would
rather stick with their business because they
could make that money back pretty quickly. Today,
some valuations are easily as high as 100 times
earnings. So, founders and early investors would
be long dead before the company has had time to
make more money than what they could just get
by selling. Now, some of these companies could
continue to grow, but a lot of them still fail.
A lot of them never make any profit at all,
but still make their founders very wealthy.
Big existing companies don't mind this because it
lets them simply purchase the best ideas before
they can compete with them. And they don't need
to take the risks of funding their own technical
development. Even still, the net earnings of the
largest listed companies in America is claiming
the highest share of GDP in history, which in
plain English means corporate profits make up
more of our economy than ever with the exception
of early pandemic stimulus. So, where are these
profits coming from? Well, there are only two
customers left who still have money to fund these
profits. The first is very wealthy people who
have so far benefited from stretched asset values.
But we spoke about them in last week's video. If
there is, oh, I don't know, some kind of shakeup
that impacts asset markets, these people will
cut back on their spending, which could create
a bad feedback loop. lower spending by the only
people who can still afford to spend leading to
lower company earnings leading to market drops
leading to further reduced spending. Of course,
the market can stay irrational for a long time.
But this is one of the risks of having too much
economic activity dependent on a small group
of people. But don't worry, there is a backup.
The other big spender is the government who either
directly through contracts or grants or indirectly
through other spending has been such a big driver
of corporate profits that you probably didn't even
realize that I mixed up these charts. They're
the same picture through contracts, schemes,
deferments, subsidies, incentives, co-investments,
bailouts, financial protection programs, offsets,
bonuses, grants, public private partnerships,
guarantees, and intellectual property awards.
There are limitless avenues for businesses to
make money off government spending. This is not
to mention new initiatives like the potential
cryptocurrency reserve which will also largely
benefit institutional asset holders, but that's
a whole different discussion. Now, to be fair,
regardless of party, over the last 50 years, the
government has become an incredibly lucrative
customer. Just federal government expenditure
now accounts for more than a third of our GDP,
which is higher than even the total war economy of
1944. Other countries like the UK are higher. But
here in America, we also have significant spending
done by state governments as well. So, it's not
an entirely fair comparison. Business executives
are not the only people guilty of looking out for
their own short-term interests at the expense of
wider long-term consequences. Government programs
that put money into people's pockets, create
employment, and promise to solve big problems
are really easy to announce. But once they are
operating, they are really hard to roll back
because nobody wants to be the politician laying
off workers ahead of the next election. As Leonic
noted in his article, this has over time created a
system of profits without prosperity. And now even
those profits are bouncing on a delicate system
of speculative wealth and unsustainable government
spending. So yeah, I guess we got to talk about
it. The Doge in the room. Now, the disappointing
part of all of this is that almost everybody
agrees that cutting back on government spending
is a good initiative that should make businesses
less reliant on taxpayer money and the economy as
a whole more fiscally sound. But we have now built
such a big debt-filled house of cards on such a
precarious system that walking these programs
back will take meticulous planning over years,
if not decades, to avoid any runaway economic
complications. Impulsive sweeping changes done
over the course of weeks to grab some headlines
is exactly the same kind of short-term thinking
that got us into this mess in the first place.
Realistically, the biggest source of fat that can
be cut is the various cost plus contracts awarded
to companies with immense lobbying pressure. Even
those cutbacks should be done slowly and carefully
and probably not be overseen by one of the biggest
beneficiaries of government funding. We have asset
markets reaching record stretch valuations held
up by record corporate and government debt which
can no longer rely on genuine household spending
because their savings are at record lows and their
debt is also at record highs. Now, this kind of
short-term planning is nothing new. Human nature
did not change in the 1970s. And before this turns
into another episode of Angry Stickman points
at historic financial data, the more important
question is what can be done about this? You
should probably acknowledge that if you ever
found yourself as a CEO of a major public company
and you had the opportunity to secure a lucrative
options package by doing a share buyback, you
would probably do it. I mean, I know I would
certainly do it. Executive compensation has become
so generous that just one or two years of these
bonuses can set your family up for generations.
And if the company crashes and burns after that,
it really doesn't matter for you. Kind of sucks
for the employees though. The same basic truth is
true for starting a company. It doesn't need to be
a viable business anymore. It just needs to shake
things up that it gets it acquired. There are
buyouts that happen every single day that would
also comfortably set people up for life. Now, the
solution to these problems are the same old boring
solutions to almost every problem in corporate
America. regulate the financial [__] that the
CEOs are allowed to pull with their own stocks
and control corporate consolidation. If people
can only get rich slowly, then the next quarter
becomes their problem again. The last big problem
is that a lot of people in leadership positions in
businesses or the government have become extremely
old. There is no point thinking about next quarter
if you aren't going to be alive for it. By now,
pay later companies now have over half a trillion
dollars worth of debt on their books according
to estimates from industry groups. The exact
number is harder to track than something like
total credit card debt because these companies are
not required to record their lending practices in
the same way. Either way, this is an especially
concerning amount of money because by design,
buy now pay later loans should only last
8 weeks before they are paid off in a
predictable installment plan. But new research
and company confessions have revealed what you
probably already knew. People aren't really
paying off their CLA account. They are just
using it as a new way to make their month go a
little bit further at the end of their money.
Most of the largest buy now pay later companies
are barely 10 years old now. But in that time,
they have been able to scale rapidly thanks
to a combination of generous investor funding,
a techro attitude towards regulations, and a
service that was appealing to people who didn't
want to go through a formal credit application
process for whatever reason. The argument was that
these companies weren't giving out loans. They
were just letting people split up their purchase
into smaller payments made over a set time period.
And if everything was done properly, the users
wouldn't even need to pay interest. But now, after
giving out quick, easy not loans to anybody who
could download an app, the companies are pulling a
shocked Pikachu that their not debt is not getting
paid back. Now, consumer debt defaults are on the
rise everywhere. But BNPL has its own risks that
could make this a whole lot worse than people not
being able to split up their Costco hot dog into
four easy payments. On the surface, buy now pay
later services are not a drastically different
financial product to a credit card. Both let you
make purchases now and let you pay it off later.
Both offer interest free periods if you make your
payments on time. And both have been embraced by
companies that want to sell you [__] because
they make it easier to spend money you don't have.
Now, it's true that both of these financing
options have extremely high interest rates
and fees if you don't make your payments on time.
And while buy now pay later companies tend to try
to hide these risks, I hope it isn't shocking
to you that delinquent unsecured consumer debt
is considered very risky and therefore attracts a
high interest rate. But for financial tools that
seem so similar at face value, there is one big
difference that people tend to overlook. According
to data collected by the Fed, credit cards are
some of the most profitable products that banks
offer to their customers, even including their
interest free purchase periods. The banks still
make returns four times higher on credit card
lending than other products like mortgages,
commercial lending, and traditional personal
loans. By now, pay later companies, on the other
hand, have struggled to turn a profit at all. In
fact, most of them have been making spectacular
losses. According to public financials, a firm
lost nearly half a billion dollars last year,
which was actually an improvement on the year
before where they lost nearly a full billion
dollars. Other companies like Afterpay, CLA,
and PayPal's paying for are harder to get data
on because they are either private companies that
don't have to publicly disclose their financials
or they were acquired by other companies which
mixes in their losses with profits from other
parts of the business. CLA has raised a lot
of capital from the ever reliable Soft Bank
to scale its business operations. The company
did claim to have some quarters of profitability
thanks to their creative use of AI to cut down on
customer support expenses, but a lot of that was
actually thanks to low borrowing costs, a generous
interpretation of how reliably their customers
would repay their installments, and ignoring
everything else that it takes to run the business.
The company's actual profit for the quarter was a
nearly $und00 million loss, doubling from the same
time last year. In the supposed golden age of buy
now pay later, the industry leader has had to put
off its IPO because it's not clear if the business
is even viable. These losses are occurring across
the industry despite the fact that these companies
typically take a larger cut of sales for merchants
and charge higher effective interest rates
on delinquencies because oh yeah, even if
you don't personally use any of these services,
you are still paying the price for them. The way
that buy now pay later companies were supposed
to make their money was by charging a higher
than normal merchant fee from the retailers that
use them as a payment option. Mass market credit
card processors like Square, Stripe, Shopify, or
PayPal usually charge merchants around 1 and a
half to three and a half% on sales to take credit
card payments according to data from NerdWallet
and the company's own information portals. By
now, pay later companies have started charging
as much as 8% on sales to average retailers.
According to a report by merchant cost consulting,
larger companies like Walmart, Amazon, and Door
Dash can negotiate these rates individually,
but those agreements are largely kept private.
For many retailers, 8% represents their entire
profit margin after costs and expenses on a sale.
So paying that much to a buy now pay later company
is untenable. The problem is that the merchant
agreements to buy now pay later companies forbids
retailers from passing along these fees to
customers. So they have an option. Either
make no profit on sales through platforms like
CLA or raise prices for everybody to cover this
new expense. Now the third option would be to not
offer these payment options at all. But companies
don't want to do that for three simple reasons.
The first is that by now pay later customers
are the perfect kind of customers. According
to industry data, they are much younger than
formal credit card users spend more impulsively
and have purchasing power thanks to being able to
split up their payments. A report published by the
Harvard Business Review found that after consumers
started using buy now pay later services, they
were 17 to 26% more likely to make a purchase.
Not only that, but their average purchase was 10%
larger than it was with normal payment methods,
leading to an overall increase of 30% in
discretionary spending. A 30% increase in
spending on non-essentials is not something that
the average household can reasonably afford right
now, especially amongst the groups attracted to
BNPL. For people who can get access to them and
use them responsibly, credit cards are an overall
better value proposition. They have more flexible
terms, they have better reward programs, and
they can help users build up their credit.
They are also more strictly regulated because
they are officially classified as a debt. By
now pay later companies have so far dodged that
official classification which means they are not
as tightly regulated which means they can give
credit to people who would otherwise struggle to
get it. Now this is not to say that credit cards
are some flawless financial product. They too can
easily let people spend money they don't have on
they don't need. But there are more rules about
responsible lending. Since BNO applications don't
show up on official credit reporting records.
It also lets particularly self-destructive users
pull some impressive financial maneuvers. People
can get a credit card and apply for BNPL loans at
the same time without each of the lenders knowing
about the others. They can then use their credit
card to make their BNPL payment stretching out
the period between purchase and actually
needing money by more than 4 months. Now,
maybe there is a finance bro justification about
the time value of money here. But let's be honest,
people are either doing this because they are
incredibly financially irresponsible or because
they have no other choice. The cost of living
has outpaced most people's incomes. Eventually,
this is going to catch up with us. But for now,
people are stretching things out for as long as
they can using financial gymnastics like this.
Buy now pay later has become just another tool
to delay the inevitable. According to an
industry survey conducted by Lendingree,
one of the fastest growing purchase markets
for these services is in groceries. So yeah,
it's easy to characterize people using services
like Afterpay as reckless consumers. And there
certainly are people being irresponsible, but
a lot of this excess spending is really just
people who couldn't afford to keep up. Even back
in the good old days of 2023, a study conducted by
the Fed found that more than half of BNPL users
took on these loans because it was the only way
they could afford it. So yeah, people spending
money that they shouldn't or couldn't spend is
a powerful incentive for businesses to accept the
massive commission that these companies charge for
their services. This is this uh is this stuff
regulated or are you guys what are you doing
here? Uh sort of sort of. Jesus Christ, the spread
on these is huge. 50% commission. For what? It's
our markup for our services. Anyway, if all of
that wasn't good enough, these services collect
a lot of data on their customers and act as a
sales platform for brand partners, pushing deals
and specialtime offers directly to individual
consumers at specifically tailored times. In
the early days of companies like Afterpay, they
started out almost entirely as a sales platform,
running events like Afterpay Day, where partner
retailers could run sales in a big online event.
This has become less of a priority as
the companies are now first and foremost
a payment provider, but they still use it as a
way to justify their business as a sales driver
instead of just a fee generator. CLA was once
valued at over $45 billion, and investors didn't
care as much about profitability problems because
there was the potential for incredible profit if
they became the default payment choice for a new
generation. But that hasn't happened. The money
these companies raised was primarily used to
fund research and development, server hosting,
salaries, and fancy offices with ping-pong
tables. But by now, hopefully you are seeing
the problem. The money that actually got lent to
people didn't come from investors in the business.
It was borrowed from institutional lenders and
then loaned out to customers. Now, this isn't
unusual. It's the fundamental system behind all
banking. But good middlemen should be able to get
more from this group than they need to pay back
to this group. The problem is these services suck
at lending. Picking on CLA again because they are
one of the few companies that have had to publicly
release their financials so far. They have made
$182 million in interest income in the first
quarter of this year coming from people who missed
payments and had to pay penalties. In exchange,
they had to pay $130 million in financing costs,
which sounds like they should have made more than
$50 million in gross profit just from lending.
Except that people who are paying interest on late
BMPL loans are not exactly the best borrowers.
The company also lost an additional $136 million
in loans that it considers unreoverable. This
means they actually lost about $85 million
in one quarter with a generous interpretation
of their consumer losses. Credit cards aren't
perfect by comparison, but banks are slightly more
careful with who they will lend to. Banks can also
raise cash at lower interest rates from individual
depositors, and they can make money off people who
aren't delinquent by definition. For a business
this predatory, they kind of suck at being
predatory. For particularly desperate consumers,
these businesses have become an alternative to
payday lenders who also have similarly low lending
standards. The only difference is that payday
lenders charge exorbitant interest rates that
made up for the risks and then some. By now pay
later companies can't really do that because that
would further tarnish their reputation as a fun
little alternative to # treat yourself and think
about the problems later. With such huge losses
from the lending side, it means BNPL companies
are even more reliant on their merchant fees to
keep them afloat. But companies are starting to
push back on that. In order to be the exclusive
provider to companies like Walmart and Door Dash,
Clara had to arrange sweetheart deals with much
lower fees to these big companies. This might be a
good play for taking market share. But even total
domination of an unfeasible market doesn't mean
much. Investors are likely to keep throwing money
at these companies because if they can be the
last one standing, there is the possibility of
increasing margins. But that's going to come with
some trade-offs for everybody else. The same way
that Uber started out as a great alternative
to taxis, Airbnb an alternative to hotels,
and Netflix an alternative to cable, BMPL are
still in the take market share phase. Eventually,
these companies will need to make their service
worse and take in more revenue if they want to
continue existing. For businesses, that will mean
more fees for the privilege of accommodating BNPL
services. And for customers, it will most
likely mean more hidden ways to be forced
into paying more than you really wanted to. There
are really no winners here, but nobody wants to be
the biggest loser holding the bag if it all falls
apart. A tragically common occurrence with a lot
of new business trends. In fact, buy now pay later
is just the latest symptom of a bigger investment
sickness. The biggest companies that you never
heard of make billions of dollars every year by
inserting themselves as wholesalers, distributors,
licensers, or aggregators getting between you and
the factories that make your stuff. The only
problem is everybody kind of hates middlemen,
which is why entire industries have been created
from the ground up to cut them out by offering
direct to consumer peer-to-peer direct selling
disruptive streamlined outlet platform solutions
to make consuming everything an easier, faster,
and cheaper experience. The only problem is it
never really works. And in our venture capital
fueled rush to cut out the middleman, we have just
created even bigger ones. I simply put, we cut
out the middleman. So, we design our own frames.
We work directly with manufacturers. Yeah, we cut
out the middleman and voila. Uber on Monday said
it's cutting 3,000 more jobs in a second wave of
layoffs. More and more Americans are cutting out
the middleman in the prescription drug industry.
We cut out all of the middleman. No wholesalers,
no middlemen, no distributors, no importers,
just direct to your front door. So last month,
the online coupon code extension Honey was
exposed for basically being a massive fraud that
would claim referral revenue from its users online
shopping, even if they found no coupons to offer,
and even if shoppers were directed to the website
from another affiliate that actually did most
of the work of selling them that product. They
inserted themselves as a useless middleman and
allegedly claimed billions of dollars in referral
revenue. Now, unless you were living under a rock,
you have probably already heard all about this.
The original expose video has over 15 million
views and basically every major influencer
on the platform has come out to call it the
biggest scam in YouTube history. It's a big
claim considering large YouTube sponsors have
given unlicensed mental health advice, leaked
people's personal data, frozen their life savings,
or misappropriated their investments. Hot take
alert. But a multi-millionaire like Lionus not
getting his referral revenue from Amazon is
simply not as big of a deal as someone losing
their life savings on a bank they were told
to sign up for by a trusted influencer. Now,
this is not to defend Honey in any capacity. What
they did was clearly highly unethical at best and
will probably be proved fraudulent in the many
upcoming court battles headed their way. But you
would be forgiven for thinking that the reason
it's getting so much attention from YouTubers
is because this sponsor was stealing from the
YouTubers themselves. The art of good business
is being a good middleman. All of the biggest
channels on this platform are made possible
because at some point they may be able to convince
you to buy something. That means they can directly
or indirectly be rewarded for that through
advertising. The reason this has rustled so
many jimmies is because someone beat them at their
own game, even if they weren't playing fair. Now,
in the interest of total transparency, this
channel is just as reliant on advertising
to pay our team as the other big creators.
And while we don't take sponsorships from
financial firms because of the potential
for you to lose your entire life savings,
we honestly probably would have worked with Honey
if we were offered because just like anybody else,
we didn't see anything wrong with them. So, all
right, with that out of the way, this video is not
about the Honey scam in particular. It's about
what it represents. If you buy something like
this stylish personal neck fan off Amazon, Amazon
itself doesn't actually sell the product. It just
provides a marketplace and distribution services
to a third-party distributor. That third-party
distributor buys these products from an Alibaba
wholesaler in China who themselves work with white
label suppliers who work with manufacturers. Even
for a relatively simple piece of consumer junk,
there were five middlemen between you and the
person actually making that stuff. If you include
an affiliate link in there, there's six different
businesses that need to be paid, cutting into the
profits or more likely raising the price of what
could be a simple exchange. Consumer retail isn't
even the worst example. Consultants, brokers,
and fund managers, and technology platforms have
all built some of the most lucrative businesses
in history by capitalizing on the golden age of
the middleman. But why is this happening now?
Middlemen are nothing new, but there are a few
reasons why it's become particularly lucrative
in just the last two decades. The first reason
is we have simply mandated middlemen. The list of
corporate regulations only grows longer every year
and so too do industry guidelines, best practices,
frameworks, reporting standards, certifications,
privacy controls, and self-imposed goals like
ESG, DEI, CSR, GE, GRC, and whatever other BS
McKenzie cooks up in the new year. Some of these
rules are absolutely necessary and genuinely help
both consumers and workers. Some of them are
just a little bit silly and some of them only
exist to make sure that a group can make money
by consulting on the issues they create looking
at you car dealerships. But either way, there are
a lot of rules that businesses have to adhere to.
Out of this, it's become very lucrative to provide
third party solutions that offload compliance onto
another company that is better handled to
deal with it. This both protects businesses
from legal repercussions and lets them focus on
where they actually add value in their business.
Visa and Mastercard are some of the most valuable
companies in the world and their business operates
exclusively on middlemaning transactions between
credit card processors like Stripe or Square and
banks who are themselves middleman between the
customer and the business that they are buying
from. Businesses could just take cash or work
out their own payment system, but it's just way
easier to pay a few cents to Visa to process the
transaction and let them handle the accounting,
computing, and dispute resolution. It's also not
like businesses have much of an option. When was
the last time you paid in cash for anything? Lock
your answer in the comments below. Of course,
a small group of people live and die by the
Benjamins, but the vast majority of consumer
spending these days is done with credit
cards, debit cards, or more recently,
buy now pay later services. Beyond letting people
spend money they don't have, they are just easier.
any business that didn't want to work with
these middlemen would immediately make it very
difficult for most of their potential customers
to shop with them. Now, this isn't a problem by
itself. Modern payment providers have made doing
business a lot easier for everybody, and they
should be rewarded for providing that service.
But as things like this get more complicated,
every extra step of the supply, payment, or
marketing process is an opportunity for a business
to gain market power and squeeze out a little
bit more from consumers. Even benign payment
providers with lots of competition are causing a
long list of problems for consumers. But that's
got nothing on what the middlemen are doing
to regular workers. To kick off the new year,
a lot of people have been talking about H-1B
skilled worker visas. These are something we
have talked about a lot on this channel before
because they give companies the opportunity to
employ workers from overseas if they can't find
any workers in America willing to do the same job.
Those foreign workers are then dependent on their
employer to maintain their residency, which makes
them great employees because they really can't
quit unless they find another company willing to
sponsor them. A lot of companies, especially
tech companies, clearly prefer these workers
because they have more staff loyalty and won't
argue too hard for a pay increase. The rules and
restrictions on these visas are pretty extensive.
And the rules are supposed to stop companies
undercutting American workers and just hiring more
subservient expat workers instead. But it's really
easy for big companies to get around. If you are
the CEO of a tech company and don't want to pay
tech developer money for your engineers, just put
up a job posting paying well below market rates.
When nobody wants the job, you can then claim
that you need to access someone with distinguished
merit since nobody in America can fill your role.
It's a broken system that's not great for American
workers who get undercut for jobs, expats who
get exploited by the companies they rely on,
and genuine immigrants trying to earn their way
into the country. but it's great for your bottom
line. The problem for you is that companies are
only allowed to hire so many H-1B workers. So,
a new industry has developed where large
consulting firms will hire as many H-1B workers
as they can. Tech companies like Google, Meta,
and X are getting a lot of attention for their
exploitation of these programs. But according to
the Department of Immigration records compiled by
the New York Times, the largest H-1B sponsors
have actually been middleman firms that bill
out their consultants hourly. This report
was initially published over a decade ago,
but more recent data still shows that
distinguished labor hire agencies have
learned to game the system. Deslet's companies
offload the legal and reputational risk of using
these workers onto the middleman consulting firms.
And even with a small premium for their services,
it's still cheaper than paying market rates for
technical skills. But the regulations arms race
is only the first reason why we have entered the
golden age of the middleman. A long time ago in
an economy far far away, the closest thing we had
to businesses producing products for consumption
were smiths, saddlers, coddlers, and other ye
old tradesmen. These workers made things by hand
only after an order was placed with them. Given
their basic tools and lack of production lines,
they didn't have an abundance of goods that they
had to worry about finding a buyer for. They just
made enough to keep up with orders. This really
changed with the industrial revolution and true
mass production where consumer goods could be made
faster than people could buy them. Over time, the
modern business model of a manufacturer selling
to a wholesaler who sold to a retailer who sold
to a customer started to emerge because it worked.
Before this turns into a how history works video,
every step of this process has a part to play
in making sure commerce is conducted smoothly.
There have been hundreds of startup companies
that have sold themselves on using a direct to
consumer model to cut out the middleman. Even the
biggest direct to consumer startups with the most
investor money like Casper Mattresses, Bonabos
Tailored Clothing, Movement Watches, and Everlane
Fashion have either faced significant financial
difficulties, been acquired by a traditional
retailer, or gone out of business entirely.
The YouTube channel Modern MBA did a great
deep dive on Casper mattresses in particular,
analytically pulling apart their broken business
model. If you're interested in thorough business
analytics, I'll leave a link to his channel below.
The point is, effective middlemen don't actually
make businesses less efficient. If anything,
they actually make the whole process too
efficient. The manufacturer's job is to make
stuff as efficiently as possible. The wholesaler
buys from the manufacturer in advance to make sure
that they have consistent cash flows, and the
retailer handles customer service and sales,
but relies on the wholesaler to make sure goods
are available to sell. The wholesaler may look
like a useless middleman, but they are a buffer to
make sure that manufacturers don't have to worry
about who they are going to sell their junk
to, and retailers don't have to worry about
not having enough junk to sell. That's the idea
anyway. Some companies are big enough that they
can be both the retailer and the wholesaler, which
is why Walmart and other big box stores will be
able to out compete local independent retailers.
Now, eventually these companies figured out that
it's cheaper to do the manufacturing offshore,
which meant supply chains got longer and more
complicated, making the job of the wholesaler even
more important and potentially more profitable.
Today, the only retailers that can really
compete on value are major corporations that
integrate wholesale into their operations or get
around it all together. This has given them more
market power over both producers and consumers
because the barriers to entry into these markets
has become so much steeper. We aren't living in
the golden age of middlemen because there are more
of them. In fact, it's actually because there are
less of them. They just have a lot more power. Big
companies have realized it's a lot easier to gain
market power as a middleman than as someone who
deals with the end consumer. Katherine Judge is a
law professor at Colombia and published the book
Direct: The Rise of the Middleman Economy and the
Revolution Underway. In her book, she outlines how
technology, globalization, and financialization
have all worked handinand to allow a small group
of companies to become middlemen in business
operations that just weren't possible that long
ago. In particular, she focuses on the collection
of data as a tool that is uniquely useful to
middlemen because being right in the middle of
operations means they can access information
from both suppliers and consumers. Effectively,
leveraging data is an incredibly powerful tool
to reduce costs on one side of the business and
maximize sales on the other. Even if you ran a
business that could somehow supply products with
the same economies of scale as Amazon and Walmart,
you would still find it incredibly difficult
to compete with them because they have so
much data about when to order stock, where to
build retail stores and distribution centers,
how many drivers need to work a particular route,
when people are most likely to make a purchase,
and what items should be presented to them first
as they log in or walk into a location. It's all
data, and being the biggest middleman in their
respective fields allows them to collect more
of it and use it in more ways. Other companies can
purchase data from data brokers or even use select
meta analytics provided by the big tech companies,
but it's never going to be as comprehensive,
detailed, or as deep as the good stuff they keep
for themselves. The final point that Judge makes
is lobbying power. These companies can argue for
more or less regulation in the fields that are
important to them extremely effectively.
Votes over boring middleman regulations
barely get lawmakers to show up, let alone
get the interest of the general public. So,
this is amongst the most effective ways for these
companies to lobby. Now, the solution to this
problem is the same solution to a lot of problems
in corporate America. Clamp down hard on companies
with too much market power, especially those that
are not as obvious as the Googles and Facebooks
of the world. There is one industry that has taken
this middleman process to the extreme, and that is
finance. Private equity and broad asset managers
have become some of the most powerful middlemen
in history. If you pay any attention to financial
news, you have probably heard the same line every
time the stock market has a little whoopsy daisy.
58 billion dollar wiped off the exchange today.
$136 billion was wiped off. $5 trillion in
value had been wiped from the markets in just
3 weeks. Yeah, that's right. Every time Green
Line does not go up, we are told some company
or the market has lost, destroyed, or wiped out
however many billions of dollars. But all right,
then where does that money actually go? It might
not surprise you to learn that headlines like this
are written more for shock and awe than genuine
insight. But the simple truth is that the money
doesn't actually go anywhere because it never
existed in the first place. Sort of. If you can
look beyond the flashy headlines like this and
actually understand what they are trying to say,
you are going to be much better equipped to make
sensible financial decisions when everybody else
is busy losing their minds and if they are lucky
enough, maybe even their retirement savings, too.
This basic understanding has probably actually
never been more important than it is right now
because the stock market is breaking new records
every single week. Nobody knows if or when the
party will stop. But what we do know is that in
this particular case, the money doesn't actually
have anywhere else to go. $5 trillion in value
had been wiped from the markets in just 3 weeks.
Gold prices hit a record high on Tuesday. The
dream of owning the house with the white picket
fence increasingly giving way to white picket
renters. You could buy a house tomorrow if the
price was right, if the interest rates were
where they needed to be. Help for the economy
from Washington remains nowhere in sight. So there
are really three different levels of technical
explanation for what happens to money during a
crash. The good enough for most people level,
the armchair market analyst level, and then the
level that considers debt consumption in all the
different asset markets that are getting kind
of weird at the moment. Now, most people don't
even get level one right, but I promise none
of this is as complicated as the financial bros
would like you to think. And actually seeing how
these markets work is the only way to understand
how messed up they really are at the moment. But
all right, most of the time when headlines are
talking about billions of dollars being destroyed
or whatever, what they are really saying is that
the market capitalization of a company or group
of companies has been repriced. This is just
calculated using the number of outstanding shares
multiplied by the price the last share was traded
at. So, for example, Nvidia currently has about 24
billion outstanding shares. And right now, those
shares are trading at a price of about $170, which
gives the company a market cap of $4.1 trillion.
If for some reason tomorrow people decided to
start trading Nvidia shares at $85, then it would
have the market cap of the company, and you would
inevitably see headlines about Nvidia losing $2
trillion. But they didn't really lose $2 trillion.
They were just revalued using this very crude
calculation. Now, technically, this could actually
help Nvidia's ongoing business operations. Since
the AI boom, the company has been doing a lot of
share buybacks. Well, they will use their profits
to buy company stock off existing shareholders to
take it out of circulation. They are only supposed
to do this when management thinks the company
is undervalued. So, if their stock has in price,
they will get twice as many shares for the same
money, which should be a good thing, right?
Well, this is assuming, of course, that they
aren't just doing stock buybacks to drive up an
already hyped up stock. Part of what is making the
current stock market so strange at the moment is
that by far the biggest net purchaser of shares in
these companies are these companies. According to
the Fed's Z1 Financial Accounts, households made
net purchases of about hundred billion of stock
in 2024. This was dwarfed by listed corporations
that did over $625 billion worth of net buying,
meaning that companies were buying six times more
of their own stock than actual stockholders were.
Now, that doesn't seem great, but it's actually
worse than it sounds. The whole point of a stock
market is that it's supposed to be a place where
companies can go and sell their shares to raise
money to fund business operations. This net sales
figure also includes the company subtracting
from this net number by conducting IPOs. The
total gross value of stock buybacks was over
a trillion within 2024 alone. It just so happens
that companies also raised about $375 billion in
the same year. Now, this has helped to increase
market capitalization by driving up share prices.
But that's not even the biggest problem. It will
actually get more important later on as we go into
how asset markets are supposed to function. But
for now, for level one, a market crash is just
a readjustment in market capitalization. Unless a
company is planning to sell its own stock to raise
money to fund future projects, its day-to-day
market capitalization shouldn't impact its
performance. Market capitalization is kind of like
GDP. It's a number that we use a lot because it's
sort of easy to calculate and it's good enough as
a rough indication of if things are going in the
right direction or not. Now, a lot of people when
they learn this take it to mean that market cap
is irrelevant. A $10 banana is no better than
a banana that's on clearance for $5. And while
that's true, a sudden price drop on anything can
be an indication that there is something rotting
away beneath the surface. So for the next level of
understanding, you need to do what the journalists
writing in the headlines aren't willing to do
and actually follow the money. Now, I know I just
said that if a stock has in value, that doesn't
necessarily mean that any money has gone anywhere.
But in highly liquid markets, such a scenario can
only really happen one way. The NASDAQ doesn't
get to slap a 50% off clearance label on Nvidia
stock like Walmart does on Questionable Milk. The
way the price moves in these kinds of markets
is that if there are more sellers than buyers,
the price falls, and if there are more buyers
than sellers, the price rises. When people are
panic selling stocks, they are still getting
money in exchange for their stocks. It may not
be as much as they wanted, but what they then do
with that money is where things get interesting.
Let's say you had some spare money. Yeah, I know.
But just pretend with me for a second. With your
pile of cash, you have some options. You could
invest into the stock market, real estate, bonds,
gold, alternatives like cryptocurrency, or you
could just hold on to your cash. Alternatively,
if you just want to enjoy your life right now,
you could spend that money on goods and services
like a new car, a bigger house to live in,
or a nice vacation. All of these activities
that improve your quality of life are generally
classified as consumption. Depending on where you
and everybody else who has spare money puts their
cash, it will increase the value of these markets.
So if everybody buys gold, its price will increase
as demand increases on an asset with limited
supply. Now stocks, bonds, and real estate are
kind of unique because they generate their own
cash flow to give money back to you. Stocks do
this through dividends, bonds through interest,
and real estate through rent. Those cash flows
come from other people deciding to put their
money into the consumption pile, which becomes
revenue for these three asset classes. But all
of these other assets really only make returns
by having more people buy in at a progressively
higher price. When the stock market crashes, what
is really happening is everybody trying to grab
their cash out of that particular asset market.
They do this either because they think the market
won't generate as much cash flow in the future
or more often just to get their cash out before
everybody else lowers their price by taking their
cash out. Now, if you are lucky enough to get
your cash back before everybody else, you have
a choice. During a lot of market crashes, people
just want to hold on to their cash because they
are afraid they will lose their jobs and nothing
else is generating cash flow. But eventually
you will need to put your money somewhere and
that predicament is what is creating such a big
problem right now. Sure, maybe you think that the
stock market might be an AI fueled bubble, but if
you sell your positions, where exactly should you
put your money? Gold is at all-time highs. Real
estate is risky with today's interest rates.
Cryptocurrency is highly correlated with the stock
market. Goods and services are more expensive than
ever. And people are even starting to question
the long-term safety of the bond market. People
are quickly running out of safe platforms to
stand on, which has got a few people saying
that maybe these markets aren't actually broken.
Maybe it's the money that's broken. The way that
money flows in and out of these markets can have
a big impact on the way that you live your life,
even if you don't actually have that much in any
one of these respective piles. Increasing housing
prices have become a defining financial problem of
young generations, as people can't afford a place
to start their own lives or their own families.
House prices have outpaced inflation by a lot,
which I know is not exactly shocking to most of
you, especially if you have watched any of the
dozens of videos we have made about the structural
problems and broken incentives in the housing
market. But the key here is that when we measure
price increases relative to inflation, we are
only measuring relative to the consumption pile
here with the consumer price index. The problem
with this is that it doesn't reflect the changing
gaps between these other money piles. Real estate,
for example, has grown faster than consumer
prices. But relative to fixed assets like gold,
it's actually gone backwards. An article published
by Jonathan Hobbes, a chartered financial analyst,
compiled this data to show that if you were paying
for the average American house today in gold,
you would be spending about half as much as
you would have been back in 1991 and roughly
a quarter of what you would have been paying in
the early 2000s. Now the article itself used this
data to build a case for just buying gold. But
the reality is basically any assets would have
had the same effect. If you were paying in S&P 500
indexes, the relative fall in house prices would
have been even greater. So there were two lessons
from this. One is that investing is important.
I hope you already knew that. But the deeper
lesson here is that it's become much easier for
people with lots of money in these piles to buy
basically anything they want from these piles.
There is only so much money that people can spend
on consumption. So wealthy people naturally throw
the rest into one of these. As they have grown,
they've provided more money to people who own
them. And since most of them were already maxing
out what they could throw into consumption,
they put even more back into these piles,
creating a feedback loop of wealth generation.
A basic look at the historic numbers makes this
pretty clear. Market returns over the past 60
years have averaged just over 10%. And inflation
has averaged just over 4%. If you include taxes,
this generally means if you can consume less
than 4% of your invested assets annually, you
can live forever without touching your principal.
This basic arithmetic is the foundation of things
like the financial independence retire early
movement. But for extremely wealthy people who
can easily afford to live on less than 4% of their
net worth, they can compound wealth faster than
they can spend it. Now compare this to most people
who earn their income by selling their time. Most
wage increases are indexed to consumer prices if
you are lucky, which has been the slowest growing
one of these piles. This has made it harder and
harder for the wages to compete when both groups
want to put their money into the same area. A lot
of what the wealthy are buying is different from
what working people are buying. But there are some
areas where these cross over. Real estate is just
the most obvious and socially destabilizing
example of that. The reason this is happening
now is that the growth in these asset piles has
become unprecedented. We have been paying a lot
of attention to what the money printer has done to
consumer prices, but these other money piles have
soaked up much of the excess cash and it has put
non-asset owners further behind. Now, the point of
this is not that inequality has become worse. You
already knew that. But a new problem coming from
that is how these increasingly consolidated
markets are behaving. According to the Fed,
participation in the stock market is approaching
all-time highs, which sounds like a good thing.
But this has mainly been driven by lots of
people investing very small amounts of money
through platforms with low fees and low barriers
to entry like Robin Hood. The real money in these
asset markets is more consolidated than it has
ever been. With the top 10% of households owning
93% of all equities the last time this data was
collected at the end of 2024. In a market panic,
the reason why people sell their assets is because
they want to make sure they have enough cash on
hand to cover their most basic consumption
needs if they lose their source of income,
which for most people is their job. Unfortunately,
job losses and market downturns often go hand in
hand. However, as these assets have become more
consolidated amongst people who can easily cover
their living expenses several times over, there
have consistently been more people with lots of
spare cash to buy in versus the people that
need to sell out to cover themselves in a
hard time. Put another way, if unemployment was to
hypothetically spike tomorrow for any particular
reason, most of the people losing their jobs would
not have a meaningful pile of assets to sell to
cover themselves while they were looking for a new
job. And it's not like we would miss the consumers
either. A majority of the consumer spending in the
economy now comes from the top 10% of households.
And corporate profits are primarily driven by
selling stuff to other corporations. Sounds pretty
bad, right? Well, it gets worse. Remember those
record setting stock buybacks from earlier? Well,
they have outnumbered net household share
purchases 6 to1, adding even more people
to the side piling money in. If you add this to
the rise of index funds that mindlessly buy and
hold a broad selection of shares, it's easy to see
how lopsided the market has become. Now, this does
not mean that markets can't fall. But what it does
mean is that they can stretch far further and stay
irrational far longer than they could ever before.
And while they do, they are throwing off money
like never before for people to buy up every other
asset market. Sounds pretty bad, right? Well, it
gets worse. A huge amount of this money recently
has been tied up in chasing returns from AI.
These companies have spent trillions of dollars on
this project so far. Late last week, everybody's
least favorite tech priest, T-Rex, Sam Alman,
said the quiet part out loud when he suggested
that AI and the industry surrounding it might be
in a bit of a bubble. This simultaneously shocked
absolutely everyone and absolutely nobody at the
same time. The value of the entire stock market
has nearly doubled over the last 5 years. This has
been driven almost entirely by just 10 companies
whose growth was in turn driven almost entirely
by the promise of AI. Most people understand that
this isn't sustainable. But they also understand
that technology like this has changed the world
before. Improvements are slowing down as new
models are showing disappointing improvements. But
every day we are discovering new things we can do
with these products. For every argument there is a
counterargument. You don't need to watch another
video speculating about the future of AI because
the truth is nobody has a damn clue. But what we
can do is look back over these last three years
and find out how much this whole game has cost
us because the numbers are not good. It's almost
like investors are saying 100 million isn't enough
to make it too. And we're told that Zuckerberg at
that time really said okay I'm thrilled we get
to do this in the United States of America. I
think this will be the most important project of
this era. that the dormant nuclear reactors at 3M
island because decades after a partial reactor
meltdown shut down part of the facility. Okay,
so everybody has been paying a lot of attention
to the astronomical valuations that have been
assigned to everything, even partially AI related.
And they have also been paying attention to
billions of dollars in value vanishing into thin
air whenever Jensen Huang sneezes the wrong way.
Now, to be fair, we kind of have to pay attention
to it because that's all of our retirement savings
tied up in this fun little game. But all of this
value probably means a lot less than you think.
Market capitalization, which is what most AI
headlines focus on, is simply a calculation
of how many shares are in circulation multiplied
by what number the last speculator in line made
a trade at. If Nvidia has in value, that doesn't
mean that $2 trillion has been destroyed. It just
means we have put a new price tag on what this
business does. Just like if Walmart marks down
a banana from $10 to $5, it hasn't destroyed $5.
The actual numbers we should be paying attention
to are the actual resources that we have put into
this system versus what we have gotten back out.
And by resources, you can't just think of cash.
Cash is really just the receipt for resources. So,
while dollars are a great unit to tally everything
up, what we should instead be keeping track of is
how many cold, hard, tangible Age of Empire style
resources we have used to fuel this one particular
tech tree. Because only then can we find out if
this is really making the world a richer place.
All right. So, how do we do that? Well, we
can start from a simple analysis of the direct
business expenses taken on by companies desperate
to stay ahead of their competitors. And after
that, we can work down to the less tangible stuff,
like the opportunity cost of sanctioning China
over AI chips or dedicating some of the world's
best researchers to producing whatever the hell
this is. The first major major resource being used
to fuel this machine is the most obvious one, all
of those chips. In our Amazon video released just
a month ago, the tally for AI capital expenditure
amongst just four of the top tech companies had
reached $200 billion for the year and $60 billion
for the most recent reported quarter alone. But
since that video went live, new filings have
come out. And now, according to company reports
collated by Bloomberg, spending for this year
is already on track to hit $344 billion. That is
more than 1% of America's entire GDP being used
building compute infrastructure to develop and
operate new models. Now, if this sounds just a
little bit dumb to you, don't worry. It's actually
worse than you think. For one thing, this number
only includes the top four tracked public firms.
Meta, Google, Microsoft, and the biggest spender
of all, Amazon. Smaller businesses or private
companies like OpenAI are not included in these
numbers because they don't have to release
financial information. But from the outside,
we can still make some educated guesses. The
scale and frequency of fundraising taking place
at OpenAI, the makers of Chat GPT, is growing
exponentially every year, even as they have
started squeezing out revenue. In March this year,
the company received $40 billion from investors
in the largest private tech deal in history. And
then just 4 months later, they raised another $8.3
billion. Every time they do this, their existing
investors are giving up some of their stake in
the company. So the only reason they would go
ahead with it is if they really needed the money,
which they do, mostly to keep on building new
compute capacity. The second reason this spending
is probably even worse than it looks, has a lot
to do with accounting. Capital expenditure just
means businesses spending money on fixed assets
like land, vehicles, and in this instance,
gigantic data centers. For the accountants, this
distinction is important because if a company
makes a million dollars in gross profit and
then spends a million dollars buying a building,
it doesn't get to subtract the total purchase
from its revenue upfront like it would if it
spent a million dollars on a regular expense like
salaries. Instead, they have to use a depreciation
schedule, which accounts for how much value an
item loses with every year of use in line with
industry standards. For server equipment, that is
5 years. Which means if a company spent a million
dollars on a fancy new rack of Nvidia GPUs, they
would only be able to claim $200,000 a year as
actual expenses against their taxes. Normally,
companies want to maximize this appreciation
to minimize their tax liability, artificially
making things look worse in the business than they
actually are as far as the IRS is concerned. But
right now, they are kind of doing the opposite.
Chips that were state-of-the-art in 2022 when
Chad GPT first launched are almost completely
useless in today's modern AI data centers and
are largely not even worth the energy to run.
It's highly unlikely that the billions of dollars
in chips that they are buying right now are going
to take 5 years to fully depreciate, even though
that is what it's going to say on their official
financial statements. This treadmill of technology
has created a higher level of spending than any
other project in history. And what is easy to
forget with all of these insane numbers being
thrown around is that these are resources that
could have been used elsewhere. One way that you
could interpret these numbers is that the rapidly
escalating AI arms race has become an incredibly
efficient machine that turns investor dollars
into e-waste with a byproduct of brain rot. But
maybe we are getting ahead of ourselves. So far,
total spending on just this technical hardware
alone has amounted to around a trillion dollars
by just these four companies. According to data
from Stanford, Chinese state-owned enterprises
have invested an additional $500 billion into AI
infrastructure. And then every other organization
in the world that isn't Amazon, Meta, Google,
or Microsoft has dropped in another half trillion
working backwards off the sales data from Nvidia
and AMD. But that's just the first item on the
budget sheet. And these companies are finding
out the hardware is the cheap part. The costs
of getting AI to where it is now have already
been staggering. But when you do a costbenefit
analysis, it's also important to look at, well,
the benefits. The only problem is those benefits
have been surprisingly hard to find. A report by
MIT tracked 300 companies implementing generative
AI into their workflows on an enterprise level.
Despite an additional 30 to40 billion of
investment, which we can add to the tally,
the study found that 95% of the organizations
generated zero returns from AI. Now, for what
it's worth, I would like to say that I don't want
to completely ride off AI, even though I know it's
sometimes really easy to hate on how it's being
sold to the world. AI, like most new technologies,
is coming along with a bit too much hype. But
underneath that, there are some cool things you
can do with it. I know I have used this example
before, but even here at Little O Works Media
Group, we used to spend hours every week cutting
out images to use as assets in our videos. Now,
most of that can be done with AI tools letting our
editors actually work on something creative or,
you know, just getting some time to go out
and touch grass. These are real practical
tools that have helped make someone's working day
easier, more productive, and less monotonous. The
problem with this, though, is that when companies,
governments, and uh nonprofit organizations have
poured trillions of dollars into developing this
technology, useful, practical tools are not good
enough. Companies want to be able to replace
their workforce, not make their work slightly
easier. Governments want a super intelligence, not
something that can trim out JPEGs. And honestly,
I don't even want to know what someone like Peter
Teal wants. You would prefer the human race to
endure, right? Uh, you're hesitating. Well, I
Yes. I don't know. I I would uh Yes. Okay. But
but whatever these grand ambitions end up being,
the bill is adding up. And we haven't even got to
the big expense yet, energy. Earlier this month,
a group of AI researchers started making headlines
after they returned from a tour of facilities in
China. Their claim was that America had probably
already lost the AI arms race. Not because
China had better technology or researchers,
but because they had an actual functional
electric grid. According to the Department
of Energy in a report, the foundation of America's
electrical grids were built in the 1960s and 70s,
and a lot of the infrastructure is still being
used today, well past the end of its intended
life cycle. China has industrialized much more
recently than we have here in America. So,
while our grid is barely holding on, they have
had the advantage of practically building theirs
from scratch with more modern technology. Now,
this still hasn't been cheap for them. But since
the 1990s, while America's economy has been
primarily fueled by consumer spending, China's
has grown on exports and construction. According
to their national statistics and corroborated by
Bloomberg Intelligence, the country spent nearly
$2.3 trillion on infrastructure in 2022 alone,
compared to $1.1 trillion worth of spending
in the US, spread out over 5 years. This is
not to say what China is doing is a good idea
either. This kind of spending has put them in a
potentially ruinous amount of debt. But the reason
this is important for the AI discussion is because
Chinese grids frequently run with energy reserve
margins of 100%. Which means it has twice the
energy capacity it needs. Whereas in America, we
operate with margins of just 15% according to the
researchers who made this report. That means that
AI data centers in China are actually a useful way
to soak up extra energy capacity. While the same
facilities here in America are a strain on already
crumbling infrastructure. The International Energy
Agency estimates that data centers accounted for
1.5% of the world's electricity consumption
in 2024 and is projected to double by 2030 if
current trends continue with AI. If you were to
get that out of your outlet at home, 450 terowatt
hours spread out over the last 3 years only would
have cost you around $18 billion, assuming you
were able to negotiate wholesale rates of about
$40 per megawatt hour. That's actually not bad,
but it's far from the whole story. That's
just the cost that the AI operators will pay,
not everybody else. You've probably noticed that
your electricity has become more expensive over
recent months. Or maybe you haven't because let's
be honest, everything has become more expensive
over recent months. But anyway, I want to play a
little game. This is average energy prices across
American cities according to the BLS. Can you see
anything that stands out? Let me give you a hint.
Major AI development really kicked off right here.
Now, the war in Ukraine, more EVs, and overall
inflation played a part in this, too. But here in
America, we never really relied on Russian energy.
Before the recent surge in AI, electricity prices
were actually declining compared to inflation. But
now, they have almost doubled within the last 3
years alone. This is costing us all in more ways
than just the big, beautiful energy bills we have
to deal with every month. Other industries like
manufacturing also use a lot of energy and if they
have to pay twice as much for this crucial input,
they are going to pass those costs along to
all of us and be less competitive in global
markets. According to the Energy Information
Administration, use electricity expenditures
totaled $419 billion in 2021 before this jump.
They have not published data on 2024 yet. But
if we are using more electricity and paying almost
twice as much for it, the actual cost felt across
the economy is easily an additional $400 billion.
Again, this is just in America. Now, some of the
largest AI players have responded to these market
conditions by just commissioning their own power
plants. But other businesses are pursuing a more
tried and tested approach, begging the government
to fix their problems for them. Big tech companies
have been lobbying hard to get money allocated to
upgrade energy infrastructure. They are using
the threat of moving their operations offshore
if their needs aren't met, which is an effective
message since the government sees this as such a
strategic industry. Now, if we end up getting
a better electrical grid because some big tech
companies wanted it, maybe that might actually
be an example of political lobbying accidentally
doing some good. But according to the University
of Texas Energy Institute report, this could take
trillions of dollars. And nobody is arguing that
the grid doesn't need an upgrade. The problem is
that nobody else is getting a say as to whether
there are better places to be spending that money
first. Places like, oh, I don't know, bailing out
private equity when they inevitably explode. 20
years ago, if you asked the average person what
they thought about private equity, they would
probably have no idea what you were talking
about. The business was a small, unglamorous,
and overlooked side of finance that people went
into if they couldn't land a job at a hedge fund
where the real money was made. Since then though,
changes in regulations, investor preferences,
and the availability of cash has allowed the
industry to grow to over 20 times its size
back in 2000. In that time, it meant dozens of
billionaires, acquired millions of businesses,
developed a bad reputation, and simply grown too
big for its own good. The thing that originally
made private equity a competitive investment
was its small-sized and understated operations.
But not unlike a parasite that has outgrown its
host, the biggest threat to private equity today
is private equity. Deals are getting harder
to find, fees are getting harder to justify,
and returns are simply not worth the risk.
Now, I know that you might think this sounds
like a problem for wealthy investors and asset
managers, not you. But the whole system only
works by borrowing a lot of money through business
structures that look like this, and assuming that
things will keep growing forever. If that
doesn't happen, there are now trillions of
dollars in loans that could go bad. And I'm sorry
to be the one to tell you, but that is going to
be a problem for you. So, if private equity has
become such a bad investment, who keeps on giving
them money? What do you do out here in New York
City? I'm in finance. Like, what what exactly? Uh,
private equity. What is the most amount of money
you made in a single year? Half a million. Half
a million. Companies that are owned by private
equity firms are significantly more likely to
go bankrupt. The endless shrimp is not the reason
Red's lobster is in bankruptcy. The fundamental
problem is the Red Lobster got involved in what's
called private equity. You can't keep doing that.
You know why? Because the ratio of the debt
of the United States has become unsustainable.
Okay, so a quick refresher on what private
equity is and how it actually works. Private
equity simply means any investment made into
businesses or assets that are not listed on
public securities markets. Technically, if you
invest a few thousand dollars into a local cafe,
you are a private equity investor. Now, what
actually brings all the boys in sleeveless vests
to the yard are dedicated private equity funds
that raise money from a pool of high-profile
investors and use that to buy entire businesses,
the so-called buyout funds. These kinds of private
equity firms will take their investors money, put
in a little bit of their own, and then borrow as
much as they can to fill up a pool of capital that
they can then use to make acquisitions. Once they
buy up a portfolio of real companies producing
real products and generating real cash flows,
they get those businesses to take out big loans to
pay money back to them through a special dividend.
This means that the founding partners of these
firms can own billions of dollars worth of assets
while only having invested a tiny fraction of
their own money. But it doesn't stop there. The
private equity company isn't actually responsible
for any of the loans that its portfolio companies
take out that begins and ends with the companies
themselves. It's like if you own shares in
Walmart, you aren't responsible for the company's
loans if they fail to repay them. The most you can
lose is the money you invested if your shares go
to zero. In the case of private equity, what this
lets them do is go back to a bank and show them
a big portfolio of private businesses, which they
can use as security to get you yet another loan.
These are called net asset value loans, but since
they are loans taken out against companies that
already have loans, they are normally just called
leverage on leverage or leverage squared, which
does sound familiar. Anyway, the debt doesn't
stop there. Remember that money that the wealthy
investors and private equity partners put in to
get the whole firm started in the first place?
Well, normally even that money is borrowed because
investment loans are a very taxefficient way for
wealthy investors to gain exposure to these firms.
But it gets worse. One of the downsides of private
equity is that by definition, it's private, as in
not listed on public markets. That means it can
be difficult for investors to turn their holdings
in the firm into cash when they need the money.
Fortunately for them, there are firms that will
buy stakes in private equity firms from investors
called secondaries funds. Now, regulations
actually prevent these secondary funds from using
debt to fund their acquisitions. Except of course,
that's not true at all. Most of their purchases
are indeed also financed with debt. So, if you
are keeping track, they will take on debt to buy
a stake in a firm originally purchased with debt
that was used as a down payment on more debt to
buy a business that took on debt to deliver paper
returns to a fund, which used those returns to
qualify for more debt to buy more companies that
could be used to take on more debt. But anyway,
that's still not everything. So far, this kind
of lending has been really profitable, which is
why it's not just banks getting in on the action.
Some private equity firms have specialized in
just lending money to private companies and other
private equity firms rather than acquiring the
companies themselves. Now, that slide bastard Dan
Tumi beat me to it again. But these private credit
firms have exploded in scope and scale over the
last decade, and they now have over $1.6 trillion
in lending within the USA alone, according to data
from Prequin, a financial research firm. The exact
scale of this lending is hard to know exactly
because since these private credit firms are not
officially banks and they are lending to private
companies with no public reporting obligations,
it can be very hard to get reliable data. Now,
you are never going to be able to guess where
these private credit firms get their money to
do this lending. Yeah, that's right. They borrow
it. This endless cycle of leverage on leverage
on leverage is why private equity has been able
to scale so rapidly and generate so much money
for the people working in all of these different
organizations. But this money still had to come
from somewhere. And statistically, it's come
from you. It's now one of the widely accepted
rules of investing that it's almost impossible to
beat the returns of the market long-term. There
are once in a generation exceptions to this
like Warren Buffett and Jim Simons, but they
practically created totally new ways of investing
from scratch. Endless backdated research has
effectively found the same thing. Any investment
managers that have outperformed the market in the
past have done so almost entirely because they got
lucky. Funds that get lucky generally outperform
in the future and tend to underperform over the
following years. This trend can actually be worse
than straight up gambling because it's a highly
efficient way to destroy wealth. Now, the infamous
Kathy Wood generated outstanding returns through
her Arc Innovation Fund by basically going allin
on one of the biggest hype stocks of all time.
In particular, her outstanding performance in
2020 attracted a lot of investors to buy into the
fund right before it lost 70% of its value and has
since delivered weak overall returns. Since its
inception in 2014, the fund has delivered 200%
returns, which is only slightly worse than the
226% the S&P returned over the same time period,
but most ARC investors did not buy in back in
2014. They bought up here at peak hype. So even
though the fund has performed okay overall, most
investors are holding huge losses. On top of this,
active investment managers charge fees
for the privilege of managing your money,
which further puts them statistically behind over
the long term compared to a passive diversified
lowcost index fund. The fees charged by private
equity funds are generally some of the highest
in the industry. Sometimes charging clients 5 to
10 times more in fees than even regular actively
managed funds, which means that in an efficient
market, they would fall even further behind. Now,
the rich people and institutional investors that
give money to private equity managers know this.
The research is not new and it's been widely
accepted for decades at this point. So then,
who keeps giving private equity so much money?
Well, hot take alert, but the original idea of
private equity was actually really good. Now,
I know a lot of you are furiously typing in the
comments already because yeah, private equity has
turned into an incredibly destructive monolith,
but it didn't start out like this. For investors,
it actually could beat the market because it had
nothing to do with the market. Private equity
didn't deal with listed companies. So, it didn't
have to compete with all the nerds on Wall Street
that did mathematics PhDs at Penn to ek out three
basis points of alpha. Instead of trying to
find hidden value in terabytes of market data,
private equity instead invested in smaller
local businesses and actively added value by
combining their business acumen with the skills
of the previous owners. A lot of small business
owners are really good at their craft, but they
lack formal business training, so they don't
optimize things like marketing, accounting, tax
management, or expansion opportunities. In theory,
the management teams from private equity could
find these businesses, make their improvements,
and maximize the returns of good, honest
businesses to beat the market consistently.
In the early days, this was not a job that finance
bros wanted to be doing because instead of hanging
out in Manhattan highrises working on glamorous
deals, they would be setting up bookkeeping
software for a regional plumbing company in Ohio.
Over time, people noticed that they could make
a lot of money and charge a lot of fees for this
kind of groundwork, which made it more attractive
than even top investment banks or hedge funds.
But this has started to change for three reasons.
The first problem is that as the popularity of
private equity has grown, it's become harder to
find businesses worth buying. Back in the early
days when the industry was still in its infancy,
small business owners would find it really
difficult to sell their businesses because
not many people have the capital and the expertise
to run something like an HVAC company or mechanic
shop. Because of this, private equity firms
could normally acquire a business for just two
to three times their annual earnings. Meaning,
even if they didn't make any improvements,
they would theoretically be making strong returns
just for maintaining operations. But as more
firms got into the game, the people selling their
businesses had more offers coming in, which meant
new PE firms had to make bigger and bigger bids to
secure acquisitions. According to First Page Sage,
a research firm that collects data on this
industry, the average HVAC company now sells
for a multiple of between 5 and 10 times their
earnings. Now, this data is really hard to collect
because the details of private equity business
sales don't need to be publicly disclosed.
This particular report is just a guesstimation
based on network feedback, expert interviews,
and internal databases. Even based on these rough
numbers, a business that pays 10 years to cover
its purchase price is no longer beating the market
after fees and expenses, which means that private
equity firms had to start pushing their portfolio
companies harder to squeeze out more profit and
then flip them for big capital gains. Now, for
a while, this worked because of a fun little
trick they could pull in a growing market. After
private equity firms improved the businesses they
acquired, they could sell it for a profit. And
over time, the largest buyer of businesses sold
by private equity firms were other private
equity firms. Because new firms were paying
more and more for acquisitions every year, this
made returns look incredibly strong because they
were literally pumping their own market. These
strong returns attracted more investment and
allowed private equity companies to take on more
debt to buy more businesses, driving up prices,
which created strong returns for the people who
got in early. This little feedback loop generated
incredible returns and made the long-term risks
someone else's problem. So it incentivized the
second problem. Once firms ran out of good stable
businesses with solid cash flows to acquire,
they had to look for riskier options to pull the
same trick with. That either meant paying more for
businesses in good stable industries or looking
at questionable businesses in risky industries.
It didn't really matter because the point was to
flip them to the next buyer. As a random example,
there is a good chance that some of your favorite
YouTube channels are now owned by private equity
firms. Look, YouTube channels can be great
businesses, but they are just inherently riskier
than something like an established carpentry
company that has been operating for three
generations. The race to find more businesses
means that risks like these will have become more
common. The other problem with feedback loops
is what happens when they start to go in the
other direction. Over the last two decades, the
conditions have been perfect for private equity
to grow. Interest rates have been low. There were
lots of businesses to acquire and people wanted an
alternative to real estate in the stock market.
But that's changing. Baby boomers are aging out
of their businesses in record numbers, which is
putting more supply back onto the market. Small
business owners are also more savvy than they
were 20 years ago. Everything you would ever need
to know about running a business effectively is
available online, which means there isn't as much
opportunity for the private equity Wharton grads
to step in and make big improvements. And finally,
people are just becoming more skeptical of the
industry. New investments into private equity have
plunged 35% this year because people are realizing
how hard it is to get their cash back out of
the system. 2025 is on track to be the lowest
fundraising year for private equity in over a
decade. Unlike public stocks, it's really hard to
tell how much private companies are actually worth
until they are sold. What this has done is let
private equity managers sell the businesses that
have performed well and hold on to the businesses
that have not. This makes fund performance look
really good by realizing potential gains
and hiding unrealized losses. But it also
means that slowly the portfolio fills up with bad
underperforming businesses and that can only be
kept under wraps for so long. If enough investors
stop investing then private equity will lose their
biggest buyers which are other private equity
firms. Another group that has been doing well
are the secondaries firms. These were the firms
that would buy stakes of private equity investors
for a discount to give them liquidity when they
needed it. In a surprising twist, some of the
biggest groups getting out of private equity
right now are colleges with large endowments.
Harvard in particular has billions of dollars
invested in private equity and for some reason
it needs to raise a little bit of cash right now.
So it's selling its stake to anybody that will buy
it. If new investors can buy discounted shares
and buyout firms from panic sellers then there
isn't really any reason why they would invest in
a new fund without a discount. Now that actually
shouldn't be a problem. The firms could just focus
on improving the businesses in their portfolio and
accept slightly lower returns for a little while.
The only problem is that great big web of debt
from earlier. A lot of private equity firms need
to keep flipping through businesses to maintain
repayments to various lenders. And if nobody is
buying, that can turn into a very big problem
very quickly. Now, if there is any good news, it's
that there is one niche of private credit that is
doing very well. Distressed debt strategies
have had their best year ever with over $21
billion raised for funds looking to make emergency
loans to businesses going through bankruptcy. So,
you know, that's a good sign. The bad news is that
if this whole system falls apart, then trillions
of dollars of bad loans are going to impact
mainstream banks, pension funds, and regular
people. A lot of this debt was securitized and
turned into traunched bonds, which were then sold
openly with various risk ratings. By layering the
debt, private credit firms could offer low-risk,
low return bonds and high-risk, high- return
bonds, all from the same source of debt. By
design, wealthy investors and the fund managers
use a lot of debt because it means they don't
actually have to invest that much of their own
money to make big returns when things are doing
well. But it also means that they don't stand
to lose much if things fall apart either. Now,
fortunately, this is not as big of a structural
issue as mortgage back securities were in 2008.
But if a PE slowdown can't be managed carefully,
it could massively disrupt the market for small
businesses, just like the subprime mortgage crisis
disrupted the market for real estate. But wait,
there's more. The last 2 years, the value of
everything from G-Class Mercedes to Rolex,
Submariners, luxury handbags, and trading cards
has taken a huge hit. Basically, if you saw a
luxury product in a sketchy ad from some guy
trying to sell you a drop shipping course,
it's probably hald in value. If you are ever
feeling bad about your own personal financial
choices, go and watch finance brokers try to
unwind someone who has $150,000 in negative
equity on an electric that they purchased with
an 8-year loan to rent out on Turo. It should
make you feel much better. But I am sorry to tell
you that these things might be starting to turn
around for these douchebags. We are re-entering a
market where Bitcoin is breaking all-time records,
stons are only going up and Dogecoin is worth more
than Nintendo, Delta Airlines, or the Ford Motor
Company. In a market where prices only go up, you
better brace yourself because people are going to
say that just about anything is an investment
to convince their customers to convince their
partners or just to convince themselves. But that
doesn't matter as long as they can't convince you.
That is how I could justify spending $11,000
on a first edition pack of Pokmon cards from
Logan Paul. that watches are actually not just
fashion, not just a statement about who you are.
I have been collecting these bags for a minute.
They're also a great investment. Oh, sorry. You
owe about 190 left. Yeah. All right. Hummer EV.
Did you see my other Hummer video with the guy
that was like $100,000 upside down? Yeah, that
was Yeah. Yeah. Alternative investments do have
a lot of attractive qualities for sophisticated
investors that know how to effectively use them.
Assets like commercial real estate, patents,
private equity, distressed debt, commodities,
and even some collectibles have been purchased
by wealthy people as part of their broader
investment strategy because they do actually have
a few advantages. The value of these assets are
often uncorrelated to the return of the stock
market, which means that if you are a wealthy
individual that loses their job during a market
crash, you won't have to sell your investment
at record low prices to stay afloat because some
of your alternative investments should still be
doing fine. If you just had investment in equities
and lost your high-paying job in a market crash,
you might be forced to sell your shares at the
bottom of the market, which as the finance bro say
is not awesome. Some alternative investments also
let their investors have more control over their
value. If you own a boring old well- diversified
stock portfolio, there isn't much you can do to
make the whole stock market more valuable. If
you own a piece of commercial real estate or
even something like artwork, you can market it or
do it up, which might help improve its sale price.
Alternative investments also generally have less
competitive markets. If you are trying to find an
edge in the market for stocks or bonds, you are
going up against teams of quantitative analysts
from Jane Street and Citadel Securities who did
a 4-year math program at MIT just to ek out five
basis points of alpha. You might actually know
something about a niche alternative investment
that does genuinely give you an edge without
it bordering on insider trading because the
Securities and Exchange Commission really doesn't
care about what happens in these markets. Now,
if you are an industry insider, that could be a
really good thing. But more likely for you, it's
a really bad thing. So, before you go and rethink
that Masterworks investment, you should also know
about the long list of drawbacks with alternative
investments. They are normally highly illiquid
because the market for them is niche, which
means finding a competitive buyer can sometimes
take years. They are also much more expensive to
buy and sell. You can buy stocks on any number
of commission-free brokerages. And while they do
have some hidden fees, they are barely a rounding
air. If you want to sell a piece of artwork,
piece of jewellery, or some other collectible,
you are probably going to need to go through an
auction house or third party dealer. Sotherby's,
for example, is the most well-known auction house
in the world. And they charge a 20% commission on
any sale under $10 million, which is actually
paid by the buyer. Any investment where you are
automatically 20% down the moment you make your
purchase is going to be risky at best. But let's
be honest, most of you watching aren't seriously
considering a multi-million dollar artwork to
round out your investment strategy. And if you
are seriously considering a syndicated artwork
investment system, then I have really failed
to teach you how money works. The alternative
investments that have really been generating all
the attention are manufactured luxury goods that
can't keep up with demand or intentionally limit
production to create a sense of exclusivity.
High-end luxury watches from brands like PC,
Philippe, and Rolex. Limited run cars, as well
as certain designer shoes and handbags, all have
long wait lists from authorized dealers that can
stretch for years before you're even allowed to
drop 5 figures on a fashion accessory. This has
created a huge gray market for these items where
people can wait to buy a bag or a watch from these
stores and then sell them for a premium to a buyer
who just wants their new toy right now. Something
that you can buy one day and then instantly sell
the next day for a huge premium sounds like the
most risk-free investment there is. And it would
be if it actually worked like that. People have
seen the opportunity to make some easy money and
have ran with it so hard that there are even sites
that collate sales data to make trackable indexes
which as you can see have not been telling a good
story about the actual performance of these
investments. It might be unsurprising to you,
but the hype around these markets is also highly
correlated with the hype around other alternative
investments like cryptocurrencies. And with the
current massive rally in dog themed financial
instruments and other such nonsense, we got to
talk about it before anybody else does something
stupid. There is of course another reason why
people are attracted to highly speculative
alternative investments and that's simply their
potential to be a lottery ticket out of poverty.
A well- diversified portfolio of stocks, bonds,
and real estate is an incredibly powerful tool
to build wealth. But if you don't have any wealth
to begin with, even Warren Buffett level returns
won't make you wealthy within your lifetime unless
you can make consistent contributions towards
those investments. Cryptocurrencies, meme stocks,
trading cards, and even straightup gambling is
giving hope to a lot of people. Even if for most
of them, it will only make their problems worse.
But for the lucky few who did time their purchases
correctly, they have turned incidental amounts of
money into very substantial positions. The
people that have sold out of these positions
have a higher propensity to consume, especially
on luxury goods to show off their new fortunes,
which was in part why the aftermarket for luxury
goods saw such a boom from 2020 to 2022. The trend
was so strong that these items were seen as
investments themselves. The brands themselves,
although they would never publicly admit it,
heavily played into this idea of scarcity by
limiting their production of popular products and
raising prices above the rate of inflation year
after year to make it seem like it was a privilege
to pay the price of a family SUV for a watch. At
the end of the day, these are companies with a
profit motive, and the only reason they would
limit production is because it would increase the
premium they could charge. Paying $50,000 for a
watch seems stupid. But if someone that just made
a fortune on a monkey JPEG is willing to buy it
off you for $100,000, then it's just responsible
investing. But what is particularly interesting
is why this isn't happening again this time.
The price of highly risky investments is up,
but the price of all the junk that people normally
buy when their doggy coin moons has stayed down.
So what gives? The logical answer is that sports
betting and meme-coin speculators have suddenly
become very fiscally responsible. And instead of
blowing their profits on babbling goods to show
off their newfound wealth, they are prudently
investing it into a structured portfolio to
provide them with a stable return. Yeah. Okay. So,
there are actually three things that have happened
here. These dumb expensive trinkets that people
insisted were great investments are actually an
indication of a much bigger shift in the economy
and habits of retail investors. The first big
change is that these markets, which used to be
made up of small-time unsophisticated investors,
have become just as consolidated, if not more
consolidated than traditional equities markets,
with the largest, wealthiest investors controlling
a huge share of the total supply of things like
cryptocurrencies. Bitcoin going from 20K to
90K in a year will make people a lot of money,
but it's going mainly to the type of people that
already had a lot of money to put into a risky
investment. It's a huge return, but to someone who
only had $1,000 to invest, it's not going to make
them life-changing amounts of money like it would
have if they invested early in the 2010s. If the
Winklvoss twins make an extra billion dollars on
the appreciation of Bitcoin, they are not going
to wear 100,000 PC Philippes. Which means even
though the net wealth creation might be the same,
the resulting propensity to consume is much lower
when the rewards are going to people who could
have already purchased any luxury good they ever
wanted. For many of the small investors who want a
chance to make life-changing amounts of money from
their limited capital, the boat has already sailed
on Bitcoin. Which is why people keep falling for
rugpull after rugpull on the promise that this
time will be different because they simply need
the chance. The reason that people are making
these gambles is also different. A Wall Street
Journal survey of investors with low FICO scores
found that their primary reason for investing
was not to build wealth, but to pay off debt.
Credit card debt is now approaching all-time highs
and interest rates on all kinds of borrowing is
up. So even when people are lucky enough to turn
a profit on these extremely risky investments,
they are just going back to square one,
not actually getting ahead. Four years ago,
dumb investments were turning people's stimulus
checks into enough money for a down payment on
a Lamborghini Urus. Today, they are lucky if it
pays off their heavily underwater car loan. People
are no longer being greedy. They are just being
desperate. Now, you have probably experienced this
cultural shift from the pandemic era exuberance
to the more cautious financial environment today.
Even though most macroeconomic indicators are up
and to the right, but these investments are also
getting hurt by a market where none of you are
watching from, which hasn't even been able to make
its broad economic indicators look good. China has
become the largest market in the world for luxury
goods because the country has produced a lot
of wealthy people very quickly and those people
are eager to show off their newfound fortunes
with luxury goods. Unfortunately, real estate,
the primary wealth generator in China and the
single largest asset market in the entire world,
has been floundering since Evergrand and other
major property developers started failing and
flooding the market with more apartments at fire
sale prices. This wealth destruction along with
the strong push by the government to crack down
on extravagant displays of wealth has meant demand
for luxury goods in the country has fallen at the
same time as luxury good companies have expended
to keep up with demand that has disappeared. It
should go without saying, but even really smart
people can do stupid things with their money if
they want something to be true. A lot of people
want to convince themselves that their new luxury
purchase is not only a nice toy, but a prudent
investment when it simply isn't. Even if there
is a premium between retail price and what it
could be sold for in the gray market, you normally
have to spend a lot of money at authorized dealers
before you're allowed to get to the front of the
weight list. After that, the risk adjusted returns
are probably very bad, if not non-existent.
If you want to invest your money, invest your
money. If you want to buy something nice to treat
yourself by buying something nice, treat yourself.